# Shaft, Axles and Shaft Components
**Shaft** are used to transmitt torque (thus are subjected to torsion) while **axles** do not bear torque. They can be characterized by constant/variable + full/hollow cross sections.

While designing shafts/axles:

- defined torques and forces acting on the body; consider a **service factor** that increases the nominal loads based on the characteristic of driven/driving machine (impacts, load flactuation...);
- perform a preliminary design (main dimensions of the shaft) and design the drive system (gears, chains, pulleys, sprockets);
- design auxiliary element for the shaft (minor finishes);
- add sensing to the shaft if needed.

As rule of thumb, load bearing components (_gears_) should be placed **between** the roller/journal **bearings**; 2 bearings should be used in most cases and should be positioned in such a way to reduce bending inside the element; moreover create isostatic configuration if possible.

# Design and Verification Criterias
1. **stress**: avoid static/fatigue failure of the shaft/axle;
1. **stiffness**: avoid excessive slope/deflections that might lead to unstable mechanisms and higher bearing wear; consider also the required driving precision of the machine;
1. critical flexural speed: dynamic analysis of torsional oscillations; eccentric load at natural frequencies might lead to uncontrollable vibrations.

For the **preliminary design** we usually consider simplified geometries and we consider just torsion/bending actions (shear is critical only for pins). 
Given the critical sections we solve
$$\sigma_{eq}(\textrm{geometry, load}) \leq \sigma_{all}(\textrm{material})$$
to get the expression of the minimum shaft diameter $d_{min}$. 
For short shafts we consider torque only and we have $\tau = \frac T {J_p} \frac{d_{min}}2 \leq sigma_{all}$, while for longer shaft we use a simplified approach based on the definition of an equivalent bending
$$M_{b,eq} = \sqrt{M_b^2+\alpha T^2}$$
leading to $\sigma_{eq} = \frac{M_{b,eq}}Z \leq \sigma_{all}$, with $Z$ section modulus; $\alpha$ is tabled based on the type of torque (constant vs alternating).
Fatigue is preliminary analysed with big safety factors ($\phi=3$ for non rotating axles, $\phi=15$ for high pulsating torques).

For what concerns **material**, chose the cheapest one suitable for the application: stress and deflections can be controlled by proper geometries.
Shafts are usually made of low-carbon steels that are either _cold drawn_ ($d \leq 75mm$) or _hot rolled_(bigger sizes).

While **defining** the **final geometry** of the shaft, always consider the machine elements mounting, optimize the cross section and pay attention to the **stress concentration factors** (for shoulders ensure $D/d \in [1.2, 1.5]$ and fillets $r/d \in [0.02, 0.06]$).

# Geometric (Positive) Coupling
**Keys** and **splines** are exploiting **geometry* to couple components and convey both torque and rotary motion.

## Parallel keys
The torque is transmitted by the contact of the **key** and the **keyway** (_keyseats_) that are manufactured on the shaft and auxiliary components.
Principal **failure** mechanisms are:
1. **crushing** due to a contact pressure (determined by the desired transmitted torque $T$) exceeding an allowable value:
	$$p \simeq \frac{2T}{d(h-t)L\psi} \leq p_{all}$$
2. **shearing** of the key due to the shear determined by the torque transfer:
	$$\tau = \frac{2T}{bLd\psi} \leq \tau_{all}$$
	$\psi$ is the *uniformity factor* that must be consider when the provided number of keys $z$ is greater then 1 (it's values are tabled).

Main dimensions $b, h, L$ for parallel keys are standard; in particular given $b\times h$, we can choose a suitable $L$ that, as rule of thumb, should be $L < 1.5D$. In verification always remember stress concentration factors.

## Splines
Are exploiting _complementary_ geometries to convey rotation; they can bear more loads with the drawback of higher notch effects. By a geometrical point of view are preferrable to keys as they provide more centering precision and allow for some axial hub motion.

As for keys, static **failure** is mainly due to **crushing** that in this case also depends on the **pressure angle** $\alpha$ of the profile:
$$p \simeq \frac{2T}{d_m h L \psi \cos\alpha} \leq p_{all}$$
Given the diameter of the shaft, to get optimal engagement length $L$ of the spline we equate the spline profile bearing law with the shaft yielding one: 
$$T_{max} = p_{all} h L \frac{d_m}2 z\psi = \tau_{all} \frac{\pi d^3}{16} $$

# Friction Couplings
This couplings are exploiting friction generated by the contact pressure generated by a interference mount between hub and shaft.
In general press fits can transmitt **high torques**, but for alternated torques it might suffer from **micro-slippages** and **fretting** damage.

## Tapered press fit
Are characterized by a conical cross section with **conicity** ratio $C= \frac{D-d}L = 2\tan(\alpha/2)$.
Given a pushing force $F_a$ of the hub against the tapered fit, we obtain
$$F_a = F_n \sin(\alpha/2) + F_r \cos(\alpha/2) = F_n \big(\sin(\alpha/2) + f_a \cos(\alpha/2)\big)$$
The force transfering torque is the tangential one and is due to friction, and we have 
$$T= f_t F_n \frac{d_m}2 = f_t \frac{F_a}{\sin(\alpha/2) + f_a\cos(\alpha/2)} \frac{d_m}2$$
This provides us a way to estimate the dimension to transmitt a desired torque, but we still have to check that contact pressure to not exceed an allowable value leading to yielding. By static equivalences we obtain 
$$p_{min} = \frac{4 F_a \sin(\alpha/2)}{\pi(D^2-d^2)} \frac 1{\sin(\alpha/2)+f_a\cos(\alpha/2)}\leq p_{all}$$

## Press (interference) fit
The stress state at the surface is determined by both the axial load $F_a$ and the torque $T$ that needs to be transmitted as
$$\tau_x = \frac{F_a}{\pi DL} \qquad \tau_\theta = \frac{2T}{\pi D^2L}$$
resulting in an equivalent stress state
$$\tau = \sqrt{\tau_x^2 +\tau_\theta^2} = \frac{\sqrt{(2T/D)^2+F_a^2}}{\pi DL} $$
The minimum contact pressure is so computed based on the safety factor against slipping as $p_{c,min} = \phi \frac \tau f$, where $f$ is the friction coefficient. On the converse, the maximum pressure $p_{c,max}$ must be set in order to avoid yielding of both shaft and hub.
The contact pressure is strictly related to the (radial) **interference** $i$ of both hub and shaft; note that in general tolerances are expressed with respect to the diameters.
In practise we need to chose proper **IT grades** in the deviation from nominal values for shaft/hub that are compatible with $i_{min},i_{max}$.

The analysis of infinitesimal elements subject to proper boundary conditions and assuming $r_o \approx R_i \approx r_c$ leads to a interference-pressure relation of the form
$$i = p_c r_c \left( \frac 1{E_2} \frac{R_o^2+r_c^2}{R_o^2-r_c^2} + \frac{\nu_2}{E_2} + \frac 1{E_1} \frac{r_c^2+r_i^2}{r_c^2-r_i^2} - \frac{\nu_1}{E_1}\right) $$
The value of $p_{c,max}$ is computed considering
$$\sigma_{eq} = |\sigma_r - \sigma_\theta| = 2p_{c,max} \frac{R_o^2}{R_o^2-r_c^2} = \frac{\sigma_{ys}}\phi$$ 

Hub and shaft are mounted by hub eating, shaft cooling or shot pressing. Not that after the device has been mounted, the pressure distribution is not uniform, so special design measures should be used to avoid stress concentration.




